-------------------------------------------------------


                               Motif 2.2.3

                              Release Notes

                             The Open Group
                                   and
                     Integrated Computer Solutions


This document provides Release notes for Motif 2.2.3.
This contains information on what is new in Motif 2.2.3
Please see the COPYING file included with this release.


Introduction

This document and accompanying text files contain important
information. Please read them carefully before starting the build and
installation procedures.

There are two ways to build Motif: (Imake and AutoTools)

IF you are using Imake please read INSTALL.imake for notes on how
to build and install this product using Imake. This method is depricated
due to lack of support. Users wishing to apply/test and patch the Imake system
should join the development mailing list, all contributions are welcome. 

Please see the file INSTALL.configure on how to build and install
this product using the autoconf tools. This method is now fully supported
and is the recommended build method.



1 What is Motif 2.2

Motif is the freely available source code distribution for a
user interface component toolkit.  Motif is built on top
of the standard X Toolkit(Xt) and X11 libraries.

1.1 Overview of Motif

Motif 2.2 is an updated version of 2.1.  Any applications
built against a previous 2.X release of Motif will be
compatible with this release.  This is a source code release.
After downloading the distribution, it will need to be unpacked
and compiled.  The distribution contains the following items:

     libXm source code and include files
     Motif reference documentation (man pages)
     Utility libraries
     Demo programs


2 What is unchanged in Motif 2.2

This is an update release, with alls of the existing functional-
ity (widgets, convenience functions, resources, etc) unchanged.
There have been no widgets removed from the set, and several have
been added.

3 What is new in Motif 2.2

The major new functionality in 2.2 is the addition of ten new widgets to the
existing toolkit.  These widgets expand Motif's capabilities in several
areas, including geometry management, resource specification, and user
interaction.

Motif 2.2 also adds in user-defined "ToolTips" to all widgets that are a
subclass of XmPrimitive.  Any widget that is a child of a VendorShell gains
this functionality.

All libraries used in this release are compatible with previous
Motif 2.X releases. However, applications or widgets that access internal
Motif structures may require a recompile. See Section 7 for details.  


3.1 ToolTips

All widgets in Motif that are subclassed from XmPrimitive or XmGadget
support the ability to display user-defined "ToolTips", small labels that
appear in their own shell over the designated widget.  By setting the
XmtoolTipEnable resource on the main application shell (or any subclass of
VendorShell), each child widget gains the ability to show a ToolTip.  The
text for each widget's tooltip is contained in the XmtoolTipString resource
for that widget.

3.2 New Widgets

Motif 2.2 adds ten new widgets to the toolkit. 

3.2.1 XmButtonBox

The XmRowColumn widget is often used as a general layout manager, when in
actuality it was designed for menu support.  As a result, application
programmers often end up fighting with the widget to make it behave as they
want.  To rectify this, the XmButtonBox was created to manage children
(usually buttons) specifically in a single row or column layout.

3.2.2 XmColorSelector

This widget lets an end user choose a color using RGB sliders or by
specifying a color name taken from the RBG database.  The selected color is
displayed dynamically.

3.2.3 XmColumn

The XmColumn widget displays its children stacked in a column, each with an
optional associated label.  The labels appear in one column and the children
in another.  This greatly simplifies the creation of entry forms.

3.2.4 XmDataField

A subclass of XmTextField, the XmDataField widget handles display and entry
of data as text.  In addition to the normal functionality of XmTextField, it
adds regular expression parsing and input validity checking.

3.2.5 XmExt18List

The Extended Internationalized (I18N) List widget supports multiple columns,
colored text, internationalized string, and pixmap display.  The list can be
scrolled horizontally or vertically.  Additionally, it provides hooks for
adding user-defined searching and sorting functionality.

3.2.6 XmFontSelector

The XmFontSelector widget introduces a widget-based method for end users to
dynamically specify an X Logical Font Description (XLFD) interactively.  Font
family, size, scaling, and encoding are all selectable, and the resulting
font set is displayed.  Non-XLFD fonts are also displayable through this
widget.  Wildcarding is also supported.

3.2.7 XmIconBox

This widget lays out its children on a grid, forcing each child to be the
same size.  New cells are automatically added when it is resized.  The
location of each child widget is specified as an X and Y location on the
grid.

3.2.8 XmIconButton

Similar to the existing XmPushButton, the XmIconButton provides a selectable
object that can simultaneously display both a label and a pixmap.  It
supports the same set of callbacks as PushButton does.

3.2.9 XmTabStack

Designed to be a light-weight solution, the XmTabStack manages a group of
widgets but only allows one child to be visible at a time.  Children are
selected by selected the associated tab field.  Tabs can be configured to
display on any side of the TabStack.

3.2.10 XmTree

The XmTree widget, another new container, displays its children in a
tree-like format, showing a virtual parent-child relationship.  Portions of
this hierarchy can be opened and closed dynamically by the user.

3.3 Autotool Build Process
It is now possible to build Motif using the Autotools. Please see 
the file INSTALL.configure on how to build and install this product using
the autoconf tools. 

The Autotools are distributed under the GPL (see http://www.gnu.org). In 
providing this alternative build process, several configurations files were
pre-generated that are covered by the GPL. In addition, during the build
process itself, several files may be generated that are also covered by the
GPL. None of these files are linked into Motif itself. They are
exclusively used in controlling the building of Motif. Consequently,
their inclusion with this distribution does not effect the license under
which Motif is distributed. The GPL Licensing FAQ:
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-faq.html provides more details on this type
of use.

4.  Motif Distribution

4.1 Motif Source Tree

The general layout of Motif is this:

bitmaps/     Various XMB files
clients/     mwm, uil, xmbind
config/      configuration, make, and imake files
demos/       various supported (and unsupported) demos
doc/         man pages
include/     included files for building and using Motif
lib/         source files for the Motif libraries
localized/   localization support
tools/       WML support
BUGREPORT    template file for submitting bugs
RELNOTES     This file
REAMDE.configure building/installation instructions using configure
REAMDE.imake building/installation instructions using imake

4.2 Build Systems

Motif 2.2 was built and tested on the following systems:


     FreeBSD 4.4
     Linux 2.4 (Redhat 7.2)

In all cases the vendor's supplied compiler was used.

4.3 OS Support

The following platforms are supported operating systems:


     FreeBSD          4.4
     Linux            2.4  Redhat 7.2

5 Filing Bug Reports

If you find a reproducible bug in any of the Motif libraries
or code, or an error in the documentation, please reference the
BUGREPORT file and/or submit a bug report online at the Motif
Development zone:

http://bugs.motifzone.net

The listing for the status of submitted bugs is maintained there.

6. Documentation

For postscript and pdf documentation (users guides
and reference manuals), see URL
http://www.opengroup.org/openmotif/docs/

7. Compatibility Notice

Some structures in existing widgets have been changed in
Motif 2.2. This can cause binary incompatibility problems which require
a recompile of your application. One recommended solution is to install
the runtime libraries from Motif 2.1.x. Link all your new applications to
the current Motif Shared Library.

Motif 2.2.3 is binary compatable with Motif 2.2.2.

8. Change Log

2.2.3 August 2002

a. uil support for the new widgets was finished along with demonstrations in 
the periodic demo.

b. several bugs were fixed. 

c. automake building is supported in an object directory. 


2.2.1 January 29, 2002

a. The Test directory that contained the automated tests was 
mentioned in the Release Notes but absent from source distribution. 
The reference in the Release Notes was removed. The Tests are still
available from the CVS tree.

b. Due to an oversight, imake support was not included in 
distribution. It was added back in this update.

c. If an older version of Motif was installed, the Autoconf
build would pick up the older #include files and fail. The
Autoconf configuration files were updated to use the proper
#include files.

d. Formating errors in doc/man/man3/Makefile.am were corrected.

e. The directory demos/unsupported/motifshell contained no source 
code but was mentioned in configure.in. The proper source code was
placed in this directory.

f. ToolTip.c and SlideC.c were included in config.h twice. The
extra reference was removed.

g. The demos for the new widgets were originally placed in the
directory demos/programs/newwidgets. To maintain consistency,
they were moved to demos/programs.

h. The Releases Notes specified the incorrect resource names for
enabling tooltips and specifying the string. These typos were
corrected. 

i. Compatibility note for user developed widgets was added to
Release Notes.

2.2.0 January 28, 2002
Initial Release

